Dear all, sometimes when
death comes to us, we are very afraid.
We are very afraid of death. But we
must accept death while
we are still healthy, so that when we die,
we will not be afraid. If
we were to die now, would we be afraid?
If we were to die right now, what would
we worry about first?
What about our children, our wives, our husbands, our
parents, our possessions? That's
why some people are like this:
When they are seriously ill, on the verge of
death, they are
told to
go to
the temple and practice regularly. They
have everything as long as they can live. But when they are alive, they are too busy to go.
That means at the moment of death, they will
do anything. Because at
that time, they are not afraid of death. But when they are
alive and do not see death
approaching, they are not afraid of death. So,
what do we, as practitioners, do to avoid being afraid of death?  So,
we have two things. The first is knowing
that having a body means there is decay, that life means there
is death, and knowing
how we will continue after death,
we will not be afraid. So today, let's go
into the sutra of the four brothers, Phạm Chí,
fleeing from death. Let's see if we can escape.
So, friends, remember, we cannot
escape death; we must prepare for
it from now on. In
ancient times, the Buddha was in the bamboo
garden of Rajagriha. At that time, there were four
brothers, Phạm Chí, who had attained the five supernatural powers. They
knew that in three days they would die, so
they discussed among themselves that the power of the five
supernatural powers could tilt heaven and earth,
control the sun and moon, move high mountains,
stop rivers from flowing, and
accomplish anything. How could they avoid
this death? The first said, "I will
dive into the sea, appearing above the sky,
reaching the bottom of the sea, and being in the middle of the ocean.
How would the Grim Reaper know where to
find me?" The second said, "I will hide in the middle of
Mount Sumeru, closing it up and enveloping it. How would the
Grim Reaper know where to find me?" The
third said, "I will hide in the
void."  How could I know that
the fourth person said I would blend into the
impermanent demon market and catch
someone, that would be the end of it, why bother looking for my father? The
four of us discussed it and then went to meet the king.
The four of us, having discussed it, went to meet the king. The four of us, having known that the four of us only had three days left to live, now wished to escape impermanence. We hoped to escape and return to visit the king. After saying this, the four of us left and hid
in our chosen places. Three days later, all four of us
died like ripe fruit.
The steward informed the king that a
Brahmin had suddenly died in the marketplace. The king
suddenly realized that the four of us were
fleeing from karma; one had died,
how could the other three escape? The king immediately went
to the Buddha, bowed, sat to one side,
and said to the Buddha, “Venerable Lord,
recently four Brahmin brothers who had attained the five supernatural powers
knew their lives were about to end, so they
fled from the impermanent demons. I
wonder if they escaped?”
The Buddha replied, “Great King, there are
four things that cannot be avoided.” “What are those four things?” “
First, when in the intermediate state, one cannot
avoid rebirth; second, having been reborn, one cannot avoid aging;
third, having already aged.”
It is impossible not to contract the disease, and
once you are sick, you cannot escape death. Then the
Buddha recited a verse: "Even if you hide in the void, in the vast
ocean, or in the wide mountains, there is no place to
escape from it. This is something
you create yourself; how can you escape it? Because
it causes suffering, it leads to death. Knowing impermanence, you find peace, but clinging to the idea of ​​birth and death leads to liberation." The
monk, having overcome the demons, escaped the cycle of birth and death. The king, hearing the Buddha's words, exclaimed, "How wonderful!" It is truly as the Buddha taught. Four people tried to escape their karma, but one of them died. How could the other three escape their attendants? Hearing the Buddha's teachings, we were filled with joy and reverence.
Then we know that we
cannot escape death. Sooner or later,
we will all die, and when we die,
we cannot take our possessions with us, our spouses with us, our children with us, our relatives with us. That is, we
cannot take
anything with us. Death will come to each of
us; it is unavoidable. So what do
we do? This sutra
teaches us what to
think about. We should think
that we cannot grasp anything.  In
this life,
we all have this body, and we
cling to it simply to serve
this body. If the
body's desires are many, then there are many bowls; if the
body's needs are few, then there are few. That's why
monks become monks. They wear three robes to cover their bodies and use
one bowl to hold rice to sustain them. They practice asceticism to achieve purity and liberation,
never to
return to the state of
suffering sentient beings again. Why do we love? Because
we are infatuated with our own beauty and the beauty of others. Why do
we marry?
Because we are consumed by the sensation of lust and
desire. We cannot be free,
so we must marry
to release
that burning sensation. Only those who practice asceticism can deeply understand
this. If we use the
energy of spiritual practice to control
the energy of desire, and it doesn't control
us, then we don't need
that pleasure. Because we don't need it anymore, why
should we feel pleasure? It's like someone
without scabies doesn't need the pleasure of
scratching an itch. That's why those who
practice asceticism do so for others.  If we were
n't controlled by the energy of lust,
people wouldn't need sexual intercourse between
men and women. Today, in
this article, Yen also expands a bit
beyond this topic: why do we
desire this life and
have to endure death from one lifetime
to the next, never stopping? From humans to animals, we
also have to endure this feeling of
lust. This lust
is the essence of our suffering through birth and death
in many lifetimes. Therefore, on the path of
cultivation, like today,
we are not lustful. If we are not
lustful, then we can overcome it, and
we will not be
reborn, not be controlled by the feeling of lust
in each of our future lives.
That's why
when practitioners achieve liberation, they say, "
From now on, I have let go of the burden, I am silent, I will not
return to this state again." That is, the
state of sentient beings, humans,
does not have the state of
self-attachment, does not have the state of
suffering because of self-attachment, does not
suffer because of other people's attachments, and is no longer
subject to feelings.  Sexual desire
dominates, eliminating the need to love or
use others to
escape a state of confinement that
one cannot overcome alone, right?
For example, imagine a scab;
if this scab didn't have the
interaction of this hand, would it be better?
Therefore, the feeling of
sexual desire between a man and a woman cannot be released by
the body itself;
it must interact
with each other to escape the energy of
desire. The spontaneous exclamation of "Oh, it feels so good, so good"
is simply escaping the
energy of desire. That's why
practitioners are very joyful when
they practice diligently. Because they
completely eliminate
the energy of desire from controlling them, they don't
suffer, and they don't
need the pleasure of scratching a scab.
So here, we can also determine that
we humans must experience death, and
death must lead to rebirth.  The Buddha
taught this: When we are in the intermediate state between death and
rebirth, we cannot avoid being reborn. As soon as we die,
we enter
this intermediate state. Why does this intermediate state exist?
Because the mind hasn't yet shifted to anything; it's in a state of
consistency. For example, if
someone is chasing us, we run away. At
that moment, it's like our soul is
up in the clouds. We haven't yet determined
what's chasing us. For instance, if a
group of people are chasing us from behind, shouting, "Run!",
we run without knowing the
reason. We run because we're afraid of dying.
Down below, out there, someone shouts, "There's a mine! Run!" We'll definitely run. Why is this body being trapped? We run because we're afraid of dying. But when we run, do we determine if there's actually a mine out there? No, we don't. So,
when a sick person dies,
they are in that state; they have
n't yet felt what it's like.  No one
can be
born directly into any place except for
those who do extremely evil or extremely
good deeds. Evil goes straight to hell, good goes straight
to heaven. That's all.
As for us, we usually fall into the
intermediate state (bardo). After the intermediate state,
we will be reborn. So when we are
reborn, we must prepare
ourselves with knowledge. When
we leave this body, we will
see our body immediately. That is, when
we leave this body,
we will see this body.
Do you understand this, everyone? That is, when
our consciousness leaves the
body, we will see this body.
So we must contemplate daily
that this body exists, it will perish, it will eventually leave this body.
We must constantly think
about leaving this body. Only when we leave this body will we be at
peace, free from panic.
So in this lesson, we must contemplate
this. Tomorrow or the day after, we will look in the mirror. After the
previous lesson, we looked in the mirror and thought, "I'm
so ugly, I think, '
This body will die no matter what.'"  Then it stopped breathing. It was
motionless, it was dead, right?
So now, everyone, let's use
digital technology, our computer technology.
Tell those people to go to
the place where they make pictures, don't
ask them to make us beautiful pictures.
Now, Yen sees us looking ugly like
this, but when we take pictures, we look flawless
like beauty queens. Instead of taking those pictures, they
'll take pictures of us
wrinkled, old, and... well, you know... we'll die. Take pictures, put them on camera,
and get used to it so that when we die, we wo
n't regret it.
We just need the thought of clinging to the body; it's very
hindering us in the process of rebirth.
It's very hindering. So,
instead of making ourselves beautiful, we Buddhists should
make ourselves ugly,
and when we die, we'll turn around and look at it. Then
we'll get sick, and when we
take pictures of the red light, we'll see us. And
those are just our skeletons, you know. Get used to it.
We go from this to this to this, and then just our
skeletons. The flesh is all
gone, so we won't regret it. So, the
intensity of makeup...  So, how do we reduce the amount of
makeup only when necessary? And when we
put on makeup, we should
think, "Why?" Just for the sake of harmony with
everyone around
us. Like Yen, on the day she
praised the Buddha's disciples, she
put on makeup, but
while putting on makeup, she had to clearly
observe whether her mind was truly engrossed
in it. If she was engrossed, then she should just take it off.
What's the point of putting on makeup? Each engrossed moment is a rebirth of
suffering. When putting on makeup, you should know
that on the day of praising the Buddha's disciples,
you put on makeup to create a
cheerful atmosphere for everyone outside. But
if, at that moment, you yourself think, "Oh my god,
I'm so beautiful!", then there's a problem.
So, in this lesson, Yen will
only stop there because
the teacher has explained this many times on RBE, and
we've listened very carefully. But here, Yen will only
bring up the important practice. The important thing is the
practice itself. The reason people become discouraged in their
practice is because they think but
don't put it into practice.  In terms of practice, here
Yen presents to the public a
way to practice the Dharma so that we can
penetrate the Dharma, take refuge in the Buddha, and vow for all sentient beings to
understand the great path of
Bodhicitta. What is the great path? It is that by practicing
Buddhism, we will end all
suffering, not return to the state of sentient beings,
not return to the state of
suffering from the pain of desire in
our bodies in the external realm. This is the
end of taking refuge in the Dharma and vowing for all sentient
beings to penetrate the scriptures. It is
these practices that allow us to
penetrate the scriptures. If someone hears the
Dharma but does not practice it, then
that person has not penetrated the Dharma, just
as the Buddha said, like a spoon that
scoops soup all its life without
seeing the taste of the soup. For example, Yen sits
all day explaining the Dharma to the public but
does not practice the Dharma to attain
liberation, which is no different from a
spoon that scoops soup all day without seeing the taste of the soup.
Going to the Dharma all day without practicing the
Dharma is also like not having the taste of
liberation. We must liberate ourselves
from attachment to our bodies, we
must liberate ourselves from those attachments.  The
painful thought we have when we are about to leave this body
is that we will free ourselves
from this thought when we have to
leave this life. So we
often feel that we will die at any
time. You have to think like this:
If I die out there, who will
I leave this property to? Will I be
sad if my wife remarries? Will I be
sad if my husband remarries? That's what
Yen recounted this story.
Yen experienced death firsthand. Actually, at that moment,
you can't be in control. When you're
dead, you can't be in control because
why? Because at that time, your karma is
controlling you, not your
own thoughts. When
the symptoms of death begin, the pain starts to come up
in your body. After that, your
tongue retracts, you ca
n't communicate, and secondly, your ears
become deaf, you can't
hear, your hands don't move, your legs don't
move, but only
your consciousness knows. But
that consciousness is controlled by something else, that
is...  We are dominated by this feeling of pain.
First,
we must overcome
this feeling of pain before continuing with the
next karmic action. Because Yen is at home, the
next karmic action that comes to Yen is a
natural feeling directed towards her child.
I don't think about it; it's
completely outside of my mind. The feeling
automatically thinks about my child, and at
that moment, my mind is clear because I
practice daily, and it's become a habit. Yen
has a constant, continuous thought about
her child and its karmic consequences. If the child
dies now, what will happen to me? If the child gets sick
now, what will happen to me? If the child is in a certain state now, what will happen to me? That is, it's become a habit, a
spiritual practice. When
we put everything
into practice and become
proficient, then when that feeling of
attachment to our child comes, we immediately focus our intention.
Once we have focused our intention, our mind remains in that state, and then it
naturally goes away. When the feeling of attachment to our parents
comes, and our parents come, we still focus our intention on
how we should behave towards them. It's become a habit.
It goes back and forth, the master
comes, the master comes, then the
fellow practitioners in the assembly come, and they come and make their
intentions complete. After making their intentions complete, they return
to their duty, and then they make their
intentions complete. Only then do they direct their minds towards
liberation. The masters see how terrifying that is!
If, while we
are still healthy and our six senses are sharp,
we don't practice making intentions,
then we cannot depart according to
our will. At that time, it's completely impossible.
For example, loving and cherishing your child
too much will cause evil spirits to come
around your child. Loving and cherishing your husband too much will
also cause evil spirits to come around your husband.
That is love, do you understand? Excessive love. And what about
those who are lustful and lustful while
living in this world? Those who like the feeling of
lust
too much. That is, we like going with this woman, we
like that person. That is, lust is
strong and we cannot control it. It
combines with certain karmic aspects of our nature:
one is anger, two is cowardice, three is
something else. Something else combines to
create animalistic beings because of lust.
If you do too much, you'll become an animal.
Young people, don't spend all day online watching
pornographic films. Remember, you
need to regulate yourself and
adapt to your body's habits.
This creates a habitual pattern in your
body, and combined with your temperament and behavior, it
will lead to being reborn as an
animal. It's
not easy to just recite
five verses of sutras and three poems. When the
consequences of karma come, chanting
Buddha's name and sutras outside is meaningless and has no
effect on us. Because at
that time, we will depart alone with
our karmic attachments. Only
those around us can dedicate
a little something to us. If we
are reborn as an intermediate state, we will feel a little lighter. That's
why we often pray for liberation and continue practicing at the temple.
Therefore, in
this article, I urge
everyone to let go of whatever is
binding us
so that it's easier to depart. And what about this possession? If I
die, don't think about it.  The matter of who I
give my property to, who I give it to, I'll die. I don't care what
anyone wants to do with this property, is
that okay? No need for interference. If we still say, "I'll give it to this person, I'll give it to that person, I'll give it to that person," then our minds will still be searching to see if the distribution is according to our wishes. That's still not liberation.
Property left to the living to use as they please,
without interference. A young, beautiful wife can go with whoever she wants. A young,
beautiful husband and children can go with whoever they want.
Children follow their karma; is
that acceptable?
This lesson requires us to
practice sincerely every second, every
minute. If you are young and see a
girl flirting with your husband, you can just give it to her
without thinking.
Well, that's what true practice is. It's
not just about saying it.
And if you are a man and you see a girl who
likes you, you
must be able to contemplate how she will be from young to old, from old
to old, from old to old, from old to old, from old to old, from old to old, only then
can you consider that
you will die and not be reborn as an animal.  Do
n't get carried away,
the practice of cultivation isn't easy. That's
why those who have attained enlightenment are
called the Victorious Ones,
meaning they use wisdom to conquer. The
Victorious Ones are great, revered by the world. It's
not easy to cultivate. For example,
we can learn something from
others, but
conquering ourselves is something only we can
do ourselves. And to conquer, we
must conquer every second, every
minute, not letting ourselves fall.
Your possessions today are gone, your house
is gone. Are you suffering and crying?
No, if you want to die without falling into damnation, you must practice what you
possess. What you
hold in your hands, let go of it, let go of it. As for children,
while I'm alive, I
'll do good for them every moment,
but when I die, they have their own karma,
who can take care of them? Practice it until you get
used to it, let go of death, because death will
follow you to your house, before you even have a chance to
offer food, it will start pulling at your clothes.
You and they will be in two different realms.
It doesn't understand us, and we
don't understand it, so we end up harming it. That's why
many spirits come back to harm our children
terribly. Because there's no understanding between us and them,
and
they don't know our desires, so it's
very painful. If you don't want to be like those
suffering demons, don't cling to your physical body. If
you want to let go of everything, you have to
contemplate every day: What if this house suddenly collapses? We'll go out,
we'll go somewhere, we'll
rent a place to stay. That means we have to contemplate
in the present moment, continuously
letting go. What if this house
burns down? That means letting go of this house. What if my
husband goes with another woman? What if my wife goes
with another woman? What if my husband
dies? What if my child
dies? That means we
have to contemplate fully so that our minds have a
way to handle it.  The wisdom that is not tainted by worldly concerns
is the duty of a great Buddhist practitioner.
To achieve liberation,
we must have the duty to think
and observe. Of course, what Yen
brings to the public is
very demanding, but it also has very simple aspects
that are suitable for us. For example, if a
cup breaks and the lid shatters,
we say, "Impermanence," that there is gain and
destruction. We don't dwell on it,
we don't curse the person who broke it.
For example, if Yen gives something to Dung and
she slips and it shatters, we
say, "Oh, impermanence!" and say, "
How did you catch it?
I was so careful, but you couldn't catch it, and it
broke."
We are attached to the material world, that's why we
behave in this way.
Just two sentences, but the process of cultivation
is very tiring to achieve; it's
not that simple. It's a
natural reflex, like a
mirror reflecting our karma. We all
see ourselves as we want to be.
We all need to observe our
natural reflexes in response to
our own situations. Sometimes, we sit there meditating and
think we've become enlightened. But then
something unexpected happens, and we
realize that those natural reflexes are actually
our karma. To have these
natural reflexes, we
need to observe a lot. For example, if my cup breaks, what
if my
beloved phone, which I just bought for 7 million VND, is stolen? What if
someone steals or robs me?
If I had a knife, would I stab them?
I have an iPhone
that cost 7 million VND, and then someone
steals it. I have a knife on the table here, I'm
holding it. Would I throw it at them
or not? We need to observe a lot.
That's why the practice of theory
and practice must go hand in hand. To do that,
we must meditate continuously and
diligently. Only then can we succeed.
For example, if I'm sitting here and
someone suddenly stands up and curses me, making
false accusations, how would I handle it?  All of
that isn't simple,
but it's very simple for those who
like to practice meditation because it only happens in
their minds. It's simply that
everything happens in their minds—whether they accept
or not. It all happens in
their thinking process. Let's think about it.
For example, if you're sitting down and then stand up and slap someone in the
face, how do you think about it? Think about it first, then
laugh. Next time, will you be able to laugh again?
If you don't think, you ca
n't laugh. So, you have to think and let go
a lot so that you
can achieve enlightenment. That's why I
came here twice to
practice meditation. The first time, a leech
climbed into my mouth right before I was about to go to practice meditation. It was only
two or three days away. If I had climbed in immediately and gone to practice meditation
right away, it wouldn't have happened. But leeches take
several days to hatch, so
they climbed in a few days before I went, and I came out
normally and practiced meditation normally.
Overcoming it
wasn't easy. For example, with eyes
puffed up like this...  Are you still tainted by worldly desires? Where
are you going? Just say one sentence: "I'm busy
today, so I'm taking a break, right?" That's it. If you're too tainted by worldly desires,
you can lie. That's right, so as long as
you're still tainted by worldly desires, you'll still be
born with evil intentions and have to lie. What's
the point of being busy? Why don't you just say it straight out?
My eyes are swollen, so I'm
afraid I'll look ugly, so I'm going out. I'm afraid people will
see me as
ugly, I'm not used to people saying I'm ugly, so I won't go out.
Who dares to tell the truth? See? If you don't
go out, you'll never tell the truth,
right? If you don't tell the truth, you've
broken the precepts. Okay? So,
to uphold the precepts,
we still have to cultivate many things.
Self-interest, worldly desires, possessions, attachments,
parents, spouses, children, friends, relatives—there are so
many things we have to let go of
before we can cultivate. So, I
'll stop the Dharma-Discrimination section here. Do you
have any questions?
Let's ask how I'm going to practice meditation. If you do
n't like it, just sit here.
Dharma-Discrimination is for me to read the entire text from beginning to
end.  We can
interact as a group, my dear. Stand up and ask
quickly,
look at the young woman. It's
not that you're initiating lustful thoughts,
it's that you haven't yet understood the
impurity of those thoughts. That's karma. Only after
that thought arises do you begin to contemplate that
initial thought. But when you
see someone, the natural reflex is that
you like them. What
creates that natural reflex is your karma.
You have to see that reflex to contemplate and
escape it. You
'll see why you're like that – it's
because you have a mind of greed and desire.
Where will this greed and desire lead you? Will it lead you to being an animal?
Then, when you contemplate the physical form of
a person, that form decays, and you
continue to seek other forms.
For example, if you like someone and you
get them, they are impermanent, and you
continue to search. Your search
never
stops, like the kind of affection, like feelings,
for example, like friend A and
friend B, who are fellow practitioners.  For example,
going to each other's homes to chant scriptures,
knowing about the chanting and the assistance, for example, according to
my thinking, is
n't that also someone else? Ah, okay,
feelings, the feelings we have for
each other, for example,
our feelings are very deceptive.
Just like this, we know if
we have attachment or not. For example, we
usually go to chant scriptures with this friend,
helping out at their house, it's become a habit. Then
tomorrow, when we have nothing to do, we feel uneasy,
first feeling uneasy, then
longing, we just want to go to that friend's house.
That's a problem. Tomorrow we
have to examine our hearts, go to an old woman's house, see if
we still remember that, then go to a
sick person, see how our hearts are.
So to break the attachment,
we have to know how to examine our own hearts.
When we go to chant scriptures for someone's house,
first we have to say, "I'm
going, I'm going to chant scriptures for the sick person."
After returning, we have to have
methods to break the attachment. Yen has
one  My habit when going to work was like this:
Before, when Yen started doing her
duties, she had to do live streams
by motorbike. When we went together on motorbikes,
there were some older fellow practitioners who were also
live streaming, so we
had to protect ourselves. Speaking of which,
we are all Buddhist disciples. I especially dislike
anything that isn't
serious. And when we are monks, we must wear
Buddhist clothing, not secular clothes. When
we wear Buddhist clothing, we feel more at
ease with each other. And I also want to say that
as practitioners,
we must respect the
precepts, keep them, and cherish them. That means
we must prevent
others from having bad intentions towards
us. We must also purify ourselves
through our thoughts and speech,
so that we purify ourselves
and others.
Secondly, when we are fellow practitioners,
we shouldn't ask someone too many questions.
For example, when you come, just ask about
religious matters. Don't ask things like, "Have you eaten yet?" or "
Are you tired today?" We
shouldn't ask those questions.  Those kinds of comments are very
dangerous, you know.
When we're fellow practitioners, we chant
scriptures and exchange Dharma teachings and precepts
with each other. Don't
focus on personal matters.
People often tell stories, like, "Oh my god,
today my husband went out... He was so... Oh really?" Then they say, "
Yesterday, as soon as
I got home, my husband scolded me." "Oh my god, my
husband is so bad, he doesn't know
anything about Buddhism." That makes
us become individuals, and these two people
will gradually become worse than that husband. So,
we shouldn't listen to
everyday stories. Now, let's move
on to the Pure Land, meaning we listen to each other's stories, we
love each other, we confide in each other, and we develop
affection
for each other. So, let's not talk about such things. Yen has a
habit: when she answers the phone,
she always says, "Hello, what's the matter?" She lets
people talk about the specific
issue they need to discuss with her, and
she knows her duty is to help
resolve it.  Whether someone is good or not, the
next time we ask
them what they have practiced, we'll tell them if they have or
not. That's why we'll
never get infected. We have to know the difference between right and
wrong, not just putting on a monk's robe and
going to someone's house to
read scriptures. Before, when we're at their house, it
's just a private conversation between two
people, and then back to just a private conversation. If
that's the case, then the Dharma is returned to the Buddha. As for
us being close, it's just affection, not any Dharma. When we arrive, we don't talk about what's
wrong with this family, or their illness,
we observe the family and
plan how to help them. That
's what we need to discuss. Yen has
someone from the South who
also complained that two people went to become
monks, and then later they had an affair.
Yen said that's clearly a lack of understanding because
distance and intensity are key, right? If we
practice, we're just dark and silent, full of
karmic attachment. When we come together,
that karma hasn't changed at all. The scriptures and
chants are just...  It's just a borrowed means
for two people to confide in
each other about old times. That's not
right, so we come to the Yen religion, which has
clear rules in the religious texts:
what we exchange is
religious stories, let's get used to them, not
exchange worldly matters. We
exchange worldly matters with people who can help
us solve problems, not with those who
need sharing and sympathy, or keep
recounting gossip and slander.
Oh
[music]